:book: Add coast-to-coast documentation for Q4 2023 changes (#533)
operator-framework/operator-controller: docs/demos/coast-to-coast-q4-2023.md

```

### Create a `Catalog` Resource
Create a `Catalog` resource that references the catalog image we built
in the previous step and specify a polling interval of 15 seconds. This will make sure that the updates
we make to the catalog image are reflected on our cluster relatively quickly.

- Create the `Catalog` resource:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: catalogd.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Catalog
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  source:
    type: image
    image:
      ref: quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
      pollInterval: 15s
EOF
```

## Only install/upgrade to `v1.0.z` releases
In this section we are going to create an `Operator` resource that attempts to install our Operator
with a version range of `1.0.x`. This version range ensures we only install z-stream releases for `v1.0`
excluding pre-release versions.

- Create the `Operator` resource:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operators.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Operator
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  packageName: coastal
  version: 1.0.x
EOF
```

We should see the `Operator` resource eventually has a failed resolution status. Verify this with:
```sh

> kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w

Reviewer: Can we please also post the sample payload returned, so that it can be reviewed offline, without running the command to see what's inside the `.status`?

This applies to all the `kubectl get` commands in this doc.

Author: Should be done as of https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/3acecb5e0c788b16afdc7e5de5e307798b390691

> # Coast to Coast Demo for Q4 2023

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> This coast to coast demo highlights some of the new features introduced to OLMv1 in Q4 of 2023.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This coast-to-coast demo highlights some of the new features introduced to OLMv1 in Q4 of 2023.
```

New Features:
- `Catalog` polling
- Version range support on the `spec.version` field for `Operator` resources
- Semver upgrade constraint policy
- `BundleDeployment` health status

> This document will go through an entire coast to coast example that highlights each of these new features. Each step will be documented as if you are following along and will be done sequentially. This document will also use some values specific to this example and in your own projects should be replaced to use a different value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document will go through an example that highlights each of these new features. Each step will be documented as if you are following along and will be done sequentially. This document will also use some values specific to this example and in your own projects should be replaced to use a different value.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

## Prerequisites

> The following prerequisites are required:

Reviewer 2: I think you can cut this line for minimalism.

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> - A running Kubernetes cluster where you have admin priveleges

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A running Kubernetes cluster where you have admin privileges.
```

Reviewer 2: With lists like this, the usual guidance is that if you have sentence fragments, you can leave off the period. However, if you use a period once in the list, you should use a period everywhere in the list.

Author: Does this include if you use a period anywhere in sentence in the list?

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

- `operator-sdk` installed. Installation instructions can be found at https://sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/installation/
- `kubectl` installed. Installation instructions can be found at https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/

> - a container runtime of your choice. In this demo we will be using `docker`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A container runtime of your choice. In this demo we will be using `docker`.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

- Install `operator-controller` vX.Y.Z. Installation instructions can be found at https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/releases/tag/vX.Y.Z
- `kustomize` installed. Installation instructions can be found at https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/installation/kustomize/

## Prepare for takeoff

Before we can start exploring the new features we need to do some preparation by creating a new

> operator and building a few different versions.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a downstream bias, but I default to always capitalizing _Operator_, unless it is referring to specific object and is in back ticks.

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

### Create an Operator
>[!NOTE]

> > For the purposes of this demo we aren't actually going to make the operator do anything

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In this demo, we aren't going to make the Operator do anything.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> Using the `operator-sdk` we will create a new Operator.

Reviewer 2: We will create a new Operator using the `operator-sdk`.

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

Create a new directory for the project and `cd` into it:
```sh
mkdir coastal && cd coastal
```

Initialize the project:
```sh
operator-sdk init --domain coastal.operatorframework.io
```

> Create a new API:

Reviewer 2: I think it scans easier to have the steps in a procedure as bullets.

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

```sh
operator-sdk create api \
    --group coastal.operatorframework.io \
    --version v1alpha1 \
    --kind Coast \
    --resource --controller
```

### Build the Operator Controller and Bundle Images

> For this demo we are going to build a couple different versions of this operator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this demo we are going to build a several versions of this Operator:
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> For this demo we are going to build a couple different versions of this operator:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this demo we are going to build several versions of this Operator:
```

Author: @michaelryanpeter had the same suggestion :)

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

- `v1.0.0-alpha1`
- `v1.0.0`
- `v1.0.1`
- `v1.1.0`
- `v2.0.0`

Initial setup:
- Create the `manifests/` directory for building the plain bundle
```sh
  mkdir -p manifests
```

- Create a Dockerfile for the plain bundle image
```sh
cat << EOF > plainbundle.Dockerfile
FROM scratch
ADD manifests /manifests
EOF
```

> For each of the versions above, do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each of the versions above, perform the following actions:
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

- Generate the manifests
```sh
  make generate manifests
```

- Build the controller image
```sh
  make docker-build IMG="quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:{VERSION}"
```

- Populate the `manifests/` directory for building the plain bundle
```sh
  kustomize build config/default > manifests/manifests.yaml
```

- Build the plain bundle image
```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:{VERSION} -f plainbundle.Dockerfile .
```

- Push the controller image and plain bundle image
```sh
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:{VERSION} && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:{VERSION}
```

A handy little script to run all these steps for you:
```sh

> #!/bin/bash

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#!/usr/bin/env bash
```
for us non-linux folks. 😄

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

set -e

mkdir -p manifests

cat << EOF > plainbundle.Dockerfile
FROM scratch
ADD manifests /manifests
EOF

> versions=( v1.0.0-alpha1 v1.0.0 v1.0.1 v1.1.0 v2.0.0 )
> for version in "${versions[@]}"

Reviewer 3: I personally prefer for readability (but I might be an outlier)

```suggestion
versions="v1.0.0-alpha1 v1.0.0 v1.0.1 v1.1.0 v2.0.0"
for version in "$versions"
```

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

Author: I ended up reverting this as the loop only ran once with this change instead of iterating over all the versions

do
  make generate manifests
  make docker-build IMG="quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:${version}"
  mkdir -p manifests
  kustomize build config/default > manifests/manifests.yaml
  docker build -t "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:${version}" -f plainbundle.Dockerfile .
  docker push "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:${version}"
  docker push "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:${version}"
done
```

### Create an initial File-Based Catalog (FBC) Image
Now we need to build and push an initial File-Based Catalog (FBC) image containing

> our bundles. To help highlight the new polling functionality, we are only going to add the `v1.0.0-alpha1`
> bundle to our catalog image in this step and as we go through the rest of the sections we will progressively
> add more of our bundles to the catalog.

Reviewer 3: Feel free to ignore... just trying some different wording ...
```suggestion
our bundles. To help highlight the new polling functionality, we will generate a catalog containing only the `v1.0.0-alpha1`
bundle and we will mimic active development by incrementally updating the catalog image to include more of our bundles.
```

Author: I like this better :)

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

- Create a `catalog/` directory
```sh
mkdir catalog
```

> - Create a Dockerfile for the FBC image

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create a Dockerfile for the catalog image
```
(IMHO, FBC is just the format of the catalog)

```sh
cat << EOF > catalog.Dockerfile
FROM scratch
ADD catalog /configs
LABEL operators.operatorframework.io.index.configs.v1=/configs
EOF
```

- Create the FBC YAML file
```sh

> cat << EOF > catalog/index.yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create the catalog YAML file
```sh
cat << EOF > catalog/index.yaml
```

(Also, this says YAML, but the sample provided is JSON.)

Author: Whoops... should be resolved in [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

{
  "schema": "olm.package",
  "name": "coastal"
}
{
  "schema": "olm.bundle",
  "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.0.0-alpha1",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.0.0-alpha1"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.channel",
  "name": "stable",
  "package": "coastal",
  "entries": [
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
```

> - Build and push the FBC image

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Build and push the catalog image
```

/me senses dead horse; stops beating it. 😄

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest -f catalog.Dockerfile . && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
```

> ### Create a `Catalog`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Create a `Catalog` Resource
```

I think I get where you were going here: having a `catalog` composed of FBC which is represented by a `Catalog` resource type could be really confusing.  The above suggestion is my first stab at disambiguating the two by consistently saying 'resource' when that's the focus.

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

> The final preparation step is to create a `Catalog` resource that references the FBC image we built

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a `Catalog` resource that references the FBC image we built
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

in the previous step and specify a polling interval of 15 seconds. This will make sure that the updates
we make to the catalog image are reflected on our cluster relatively quickly.

> Use the following command to create the `Catalog` resource:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the following command to create the `Catalog` resource:
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: catalogd.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Catalog
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  source:
    type: image
    image:
      ref: quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
      pollInterval: 15s
EOF
```

## Only install/upgrade to `v1.0.z` releases
In this section we are going to create an `Operator` resource that attempts to install our operator

> with a version range of `1.0.x`. This version range ensures we only install z-stream releases for `v1.0`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with a version range of `1.0.x`. This version range ensures we only install z-stream releases for `v1.0`, also excluding any pre-release versions.
```
... and then skip [217-219](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/files#diff-242560c892ee9b6e3b4f9ffa1ccedabcab9aae1515aa22985e905087615c8341R217-R219)?

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

> In this case, the bundle we added to the FBC image in our preparation stepsdoesn't meet this version range 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bundle we added to the FBC image in the previous procedure doesn't meet this version range 
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> criteria so we expect the `Operator` installation to fail. This helps us highlight how pre-release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
criteria. As a result, we expect the `Operator` installation to fail. This helps us highlight how pre-release
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

versions of an operator are excluded from resolution when the version range implies that they should
not be included.

Use the following command to create the `Operator` resource:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operators.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Operator
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  packageName: coastal
  version: 1.0.x
EOF
```

We should see the `Operator` resource eventually has a failed resolution status. Verify this with:
```sh
kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w
```
>[!NOTE]
>The above command establishes a watch on the `Operator` resource and blocks. Once you are done verifying
>the resolution status you can exit the command with `ctrl+c`

### Update the FBC Image to contain a bundle for `v1.0.0`

> To highlight both the polling functionality and the version range constraints, lets add the `v1.0.0` bundle

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To highlight both the polling functionality and the version range constraints, let's add the `v1.0.0` bundle
```

Author: [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf)

of our operator to the catalog image we created in the preparation steps and push the changes.

> - Overwrite the FBC YAML file to contain the previous content and the new bundle

Reviewer 3: Earnest question ... would it be at all useful using some variant of [this formulary](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/advanced-tasks/catalog-update-formulary/) to patch the local catalog source with the new bundle, instead of overwriting with the new?

Author: Probably. I was going through this relatively quickly and didn't take the time to look for better resources for doing this. I'll go through and make some updates to incorporate this, thanks for the link!

Author: Updated in [9cecd82](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/9cecd82c89aa82af486c15b987cc97833517ffbf) to try and simplify the process a bit more than overwriting every time

      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.channel",
  "name": "stable",
  "package": "coastal",
  "entries": [
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
```

- Build and push the FBC image
```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest -f catalog.Dockerfile . && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
```

Shortly, we should see that the `Catalog` resource updates to have a new resolved reference and the `Operator` resource we created previously is successfully installed. 

Verify this for the `Operator` with:
```sh
kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w
```

and for the `Catalog` with:
```sh
kubectl get catalog/coastal -o yaml -w
```

Once the `Operator` has been successfully installed we can verify that all the resources created are healthy by checking the `BundleDeployment` resource owned by the `Operator` we created. Verify the `BundleDeployment` has a status condition showing whether or not it is healthy with:
```sh
kubectl get bundledeployment/coastal -o yaml -w
```

### Update the FBC Image to contain a bundle for `v1.1.0`

> To further highlight the version range selection, lets make sure that a `v1.1.0` bundle being
> added to the FBC image results in no upgrade occurring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's ensure that adding a bundle with a version of `v1.1.0` does not trigger an upgrade.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.bundle",
  "name": "coastal.v1.0.0",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.0.0",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.0.0"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.bundle",
  "name": "coastal.v1.1.0",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.1.0",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.1.0"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.channel",
  "name": "stable",
  "package": "coastal",
  "entries": [
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.1.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
```

- Build and push the FBC image
```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest -f catalog.Dockerfile . && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
```

> Similarly to the last step, we should see the `Catalog` update it's resolved reference
> but this time we expect that the `Operator` resource remains the same and does not 
> automatically upgrade to `v1.1.0`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to the previous procedure, the `Catalog` updates its resolved reference,
but the `Operator` resource remains the same and does not 
automatically upgrade to `v1.1.0`
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

### Update the FBC Image to contain a bundle for `v1.0.1`

> Highlighting the version range functionality again, lets add the `v1.0.1` bundle to our catalog

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's add the `v1.0.1` bundle to our catalog
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> to ensure it automatically upgrades within the z-stream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and ensure it automatically upgrades within the z-stream.
```

Reviewer 2: I think you want _and_ here, correct? Because you can add a specific bundle, and whether or not it automatically updates depends on how you set things up, right?

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

  "name": "coastal.v1.1.0",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.1.0",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.1.0"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.bundle",
  "name": "coastal.v1.0.1",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.0.1",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.0.1"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.channel",
  "name": "stable",
  "package": "coastal",
  "entries": [
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.1"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.1.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
```

- Build and push the FBC image
```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest -f catalog.Dockerfile . && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
```

> Once again, we should see the `Catalog` update it's resolved reference and this time we expect that the `Operator` resource is automatically upgraded to the new `v1.0.1` bundle we added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once again, we should see the `Catalog` update its resolved reference. This time, the `Operator` resource is automatically upgraded to the new `v1.0.1` bundle we added.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

## Change version range to pin installs/upgrades to `v1.1.z` releases
Making changes to the `Operator` resource should result in a re-reconciliation of the resource

> which should result in another resolution loop. To see this, lets update the version range

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which should result in another resolution loop. To see this, let's update the version range
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

on our `Operator` resource to `1.1.x` with:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operators.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Operator
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  packageName: coastal
  version: 1.1.x
EOF
```

> After this change has been applied, we should eventually see the `Operator` resource is updated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After this change has been applied, the `Operator` resource is updated
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> and says that we have installed the `v1.1.0` bundle we created and added to the catalog earlier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and says that we have installed the `v1.1.0` bundle.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

You can watch this change happen with:
```sh
kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w
```

## Attempting a major version upgrade by changing the version range

> When an `Operator`'s `spec.upgradeConstraintPolicy` is set to `Enforce`, operator-controller

Reviewer 2: Downstream, we have been using "Operator Controller".

Author: I think this is addressed in [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> When an `Operator`'s `spec.upgradeConstraintPolicy` is set to `Enforce`, operator-controller
> follows semver and prevents automatic upgrades to new major versions since they can 
> have breaking changes and could cause problems for users. To show this, lets add a new major 
> version of our bundle to the FBC image and update the version range on the `Operator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Operator Controller follows semver and prevents automatic upgrades to new major versions When an `Operator`'s `spec.upgradeConstraintPolicy` is set to `Enforce`. New major versions might
have breaking changes and could cause problems for users. Let's add a new major 
version of our bundle to the FBC image and update the version range on the `Operator`.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v1.0.1",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "1.0.1"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.bundle",
  "name": "coastal.v2.0.0",
  "package": "coastal",
  "image": "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:v2.0.0",
  "properties": [
    {
      "type": "olm.package",
      "value": {
        "packageName": "coastal",
        "version": "2.0.0"
      }
    },
    {
      "type": "olm.bundle.mediatype",
      "value": "plain+v0"
    }
  ]
}
{
  "schema": "olm.channel",
  "name": "stable",
  "package": "coastal",
  "entries": [
    {
      "name": "coastal.v2.0.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.1"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.1.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0"
    },
    {
      "name": "coastal.v1.0.0-alpha1"
    }
  ]
}
EOF
```

- Build and push the FBC image
```sh
docker build -t quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest -f catalog.Dockerfile . && \
docker push quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-catalog:latest
```

> Once again, we should see the `Catalog` update it's resolved reference and this time we expect that
> nothing happens to the `Operator` resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Catalog` updates its resolved reference and no changes are applied to the `Operator` resource.
```

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

> Updating the `Operator`'s version range will still result in a resolution failure since the version installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Updating the Operator's version range will still result in a resolution failure since the version installed
```
I would either drop the backticks, or if they are important, use "the `Operator` resource's version range..."

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

is a lower major version than specified by the version range. Try it by running:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operators.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Operator
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  packageName: coastal
  version: 2.0.x
EOF
```

Watch for a resolution failure with:
```sh
kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w
```

## To the escape hatch!
To tell operator-controller to ignore the semver policies and allow upgrades across major versions,
set the `Operator`'s `spec.upgradeConstraintPolicy` to `Ignore` with:
```sh
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operators.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: Operator
metadata:
  name: coastal
spec:
  packageName: coastal
  upgradeConstraintPolicy: Ignore
  version: 2.0.x
EOF
```

We should see that eventually the `Operator` will resolve and install the `v2.0.0` bundle we added to the
catalog image in the previous step. Watch this happen with:
```sh
kubectl get operator/coastal -o yaml -w
```

## Attempting to downgrade by changing the version range

> When the `Operator`'s `spec.UpgradeConstraintPolicy` is set to `Enforce`, downgrades are disabled. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `Operator` resource's `spec.UpgradeConstraintPolicy` is set to `Enforce`, downgrades are disabled. 
```

Reviewer 2: Consider:
"We can disable downgrades by setting the `Operator` resource's `spec.UpgradeConstraintPolicy` field to `Enforce`.

Author: [08e8dbb](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/08e8dbba77679d610d04f2b8002613fe94421aff)

# Coast-to-coast Demo for Q4 2023

This coast-to-coast demo highlights some of the new features introduced to OLMv1 in Q4 of 2023.

New Features:
- `Catalog` polling
- Version range support on the `spec.version` field for `Operator` resources
- Semver upgrade constraint policy
- `BundleDeployment` health status

This document will go through an example that highlights each of these new features. Each step will be documented as if you are following along and will be done sequentially. This document will also use some values specific to this example and in your own projects should be replaced to use a different value.

## Prerequisites
- A running Kubernetes cluster where you have admin privileges
- `operator-sdk` installed
    - Installation instructions can be found at https://sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/installation/
- `kubectl` installed
    - Installation instructions can be found at https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/
- A container runtime of your choice, in this demo we will be using `docker`
- Install `operator-controller` vX.Y.Z 

>     - Installation instructions can be found at https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/releases/tag/vX.Y.Z

Author: I believe the only thing left is to replace the `vX.Y.Z` references here with the next release of operator-controller and then I can mark it as "ready for review" (although I feel this has been fairly thoroughly reviewed and should be pretty much ready to merge)

Author: Updated to v0.8.0 in https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/pull/533/commits/e4c53aa15e95ebdc0144e6fc968396a195bacb34

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -e

mkdir -p manifests

cat << EOF > plainbundle.Dockerfile
FROM scratch
ADD manifests /manifests
EOF

versions=( v1.0.0-alpha1 v1.0.0 v1.0.1 v1.1.0 v2.0.0 )
for version in "${versions[@]}"
do
  make generate manifests
  make docker-build IMG="quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:${version}"
  mkdir -p manifests
  kustomize build config/default > manifests/manifests.yaml
  docker build -t "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:${version}" -f plainbundle.Dockerfile .
  docker push "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal:${version}"
  docker push "quay.io/operator-framework/coastal-bundle:${version}"
done
```

### Create an initial File-Based Catalog (FBC) Image
Now we need to build and push an initial File-Based Catalog (FBC) image containing
our bundles. To help highlight the new polling functionality, we will generate a catalog containing
only the `v1.0.0-alpha1` bundle and we will mimic active development by incrementally updating the catalog
image to include more of our bundles.

- Create a `catalog/` directory
```sh
mkdir catalog
```

- Create a Dockerfile for the catalog image
```sh
cat << EOF > catalog.Dockerfile
FROM scratch

> ADD catalog /configs

Reviewer 4: Can we add a directory structure (output of `tree .`) of top level catalog dir. Ran through the tutorial for building a catalog, and faced the error that catalog/ isn't available, because I had `index.yaml` inside parent dir. 

Just a nit, but would be helpful.

Author: Following this tutorial command by command should have resulted in a `tree` output of:
```sh
$ tree catalog/
catalog/
└── index.yaml

1 directory, 1 file
```

Following this tutorial without modifying the output paths in the commands should result in a successful build. While I can see how the output of this command would be helpful I'd prefer to do it as a follow up or provide a better explanation of building a File-Based Catalog image for OLMv1 in it's own document
